Multi config migration (#3677)
opentofu/opentofu: website/docs/intro/migration/multiple-configurations.mdx

---
sidebar_position: 2
sidebar_label: Migrating interdependent configurations
description: |-
  Guide for migrating multiple interdependent Terraform configurations that use terraform_remote_state.
---

# Migrating Interdependent Terraform Configurations

This guide addresses the specific challenges of migrating systems built from multiple interdependent Terraform configurations that share data using the `terraform_remote_state` data source.

If you're migrating a single, standalone Terraform configuration, refer to the [Migration Guide](../migration-guide) instead.

## When to use this guide

Use this guide if:

    - **Multiple root modules** (separate Terraform Projects)

>     - **Data sharing between modules** using `terraform_remote_state`

Reviewer: "modules" -> "root modules"

- **F depends on B** (reads its state)
- **B, C, and D depend on A** (read its state)

To create your dependency graph:

1. List all your Terraform configurations
2. Identify which configurations use `terraform_remote_state`
3. Note which state files each configuration reads
4. Draw the dependency relationships

## Migration order: Bottom-up approach

**Critical principle:** Migrate dependent configurations before their dependencies.

### Why bottom-up?

OpenTofu maintains state file compatibility with Terraform 1.x, which means:

 - OpenTofu can read Terraform state files

 - Terraform may not reliably read OpenTofu state files (especially if OpenTofu-specific features are used)

This compatibility pattern makes **bottom-up migration safe**:

- Configurations migrated to OpenTofu can safely use `terraform_remote_state` on state from configurations that are still on Terraform
- You can migrate gradually without breaking the dependency chain
- Mixed Terraform/OpenTofu environments work during the transition

### Migration order example

For the complex dependency graph above, the safe migration order is:

**Phase 1:** Migrate leaf nodes (no dependents)
```

> F, G → (migrate these first)

Author: You are correct, I fixed this.

---
sidebar_position: 2
sidebar_label: Migrating interdependent configurations
description: |-
  Guide for migrating multiple interdependent Terraform configurations that use terraform_remote_state.
---

# Migrating Interdependent Terraform Configurations

This guide addresses the specific challenges of migrating systems built from multiple interdependent Terraform configurations that share data using the `terraform_remote_state` data source.

If you're migrating a single, standalone Terraform configuration, refer to the [Migration Guide](../migration-guide) instead.

## When to use this guide

Use this guide if:

    - **Multiple root modules** (separate Terraform Projects)
    - **Data sharing between modules** using `terraform_remote_state`
    - **Dependencies between modules** (one module consumes outputs from the other)

## Understanding terraform_remote_state

### What is terraform_remote_state?

> The `terraform_remote_state` data source allows one terraform configuration to read outputs from another configuration's state file. This creates a dependency relationship between configurations

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `terraform_remote_state` data source allows one configuration to read outputs from another configuration's state file. This creates a dependency relationship between configurations.
```

```

Configuration B depends on A (B reads A's state).

### Complex dependency example

```
        A
        ↑
        |
   +----+----+
   |    |    |
   B    C    D
   ↑    ↑    ↑
   |    +----+
   |         |
   |         E
   |         ↑
   |         |
   F         |
   ↑         |
   +----+----+
        |
        G
```

In this graph:
- **G depends on F and E** (reads their state)
- **E depends on C and D** (reads their state)
- **F depends on B** (reads its state)
- **B, C, and D depend on A** (read its state)

To create your dependency graph:

1. List all your Terraform configurations
2. Identify which configurations use `terraform_remote_state`
3. Note which state files each configuration reads
4. Draw the dependency relationships

## Migration order: Bottom-up approach

**Critical principle:** Migrate dependent configurations before their dependencies.

### Why bottom-up?

OpenTofu maintains state file compatibility with Terraform 1.x, which means:

**OpenTofu can read Terraform state files**  

**Terraform may not reliably read OpenTofu state files** (especially if OpenTofu-specific features are used)

This compatibility pattern makes **bottom-up migration safe**:

> - Configurations migrated to OpenTofu can still read state from configurations remaining on Terraform

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Configurations migrated to OpenTofu can safely use `terraform_remote_state` on state from configurations that are still on Terraform
```

- Compatibility breaks in future versions

Bottom-up migration avoids this risk entirely.

## Step-by-step migration process

### Step 1: Map your dependencies

Create a visual representation of your configuration dependencies using `terraform_remote_state` data sources.

**Tools to help:**
- Search your codebase for `terraform_remote_state`
- Document which configurations read from which backends/state files
- Draw the dependency graph

### Step 2: Identify leaf nodes

Find configurations that:
- Have no other configurations depending on them
- May themselves depend on other configurations

These are your starting points for migration.

### Step 3: Back up everything

Before migrating any configuration:

1. **Back up all state files** (for all configurations, not just the one you're migrating)
2. **Commit all configuration files** to version control
3. **Document the current state** of each configuration (Terraform version, provider versions)

### Step 4: Migrate leaf configurations first

For each leaf configuration:

1. Follow the standard [Migration Guide](/docs/intro/migration/migration-guide)
2. Verify the migration with `tofu plan`
3. Apply with `tofu apply`

> 4. **Test the migration:** Ensure dependent configurations (if any) can still read this configuration's state

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. **Test the migration:** For any non leaf configuration, ensure that dependent configuration(s) can still read this configuration's state
```

### Step 5: Verify dependencies still work

After migrating a configuration, verify that:

> - Any configurations that depend on it (read its state) still work correctly

Author: You're right there's overlap. Step 4 is about verifying each config as you migrate it, while Step 5 is a sanity check after moving up the dependency tree. I included both to make it harder to skip verification, but I can see how it reads as redundant. Happy to consolidate if you think that's cleaner

> - Run `terraform plan` (or `tofu plan` if already migrated) on dependent configs

Reviewer 2: Maybe I just confused myself right now, but isn't this the same with the first point from this list, but just worded differently? 🤔

### What OpenTofu guarantees

- **OpenTofu reads Terraform 1.x state files** without modification
- **State format is compatible** during migration
- **Mixed environments work** (some configs on Terraform, others on OpenTofu)

### Important considerations

- **Avoid OpenTofu-specific features** during migration to maintain maximum compatibility
- **Test thoroughly** after each configuration migration
- **Keep backups** of all state files throughout the migration process
- **Document which configurations** are on Terraform vs. OpenTofu during the transition

### Rolling back

If you need to roll back a specific configuration:

1. **Stop using OpenTofu** for that configuration
2. **Restore from backups** if state changes were made
3. **Run `terraform init` and `terraform plan`**
4. **Verify no unexpected changes**
5. **Continue with Terraform** for that configuration

The bottom-up approach makes rollback safer because:
- Only leaf nodes are migrated early (fewer dependents affected)
- Root configurations migrate last (after dependents are stable)

## Handling version differences

Your configurations may be using different Terraform versions (1.6.x, 1.7.x, 1.8.x). This is fine:

> - **Migrate each configuration** according to its current Terraform version

Reviewer 2: > according to its current Terraform version

If I second guess the meaning of this, other users could do it too. Could you please reword this one please?

> - **Migrate each configuration** according to its current Terraform version

Reviewer 3: I agree with @yottta here.
